---
layout: post
title:  "Some Observations About German"
date:   2023-05-06 16:28:03 +0200
---

I've been living in Zürich and therefore learning German for the last few years.
Here are some things about German that are funny or interesting.

- Some things are countable in German that are not in English. This quickly
  polluted my brain and now I find myself saying things like "can you pick up a
  bread from the shop" when speaking English.

- "Willst du mich verarschen?" means something like "are you fucking with me?
  Literally "do you want to arse me?" 

  (Actually, the prefix _ver-_ is hard to translate but it gives a sense of
  _over_-arsing. Do you want to over-arse me?)

  See also [this dril
  tweet](https://twitter.com/dril/status/539099548548079617?t=yORZJ7flC62K_LMkXdF7WA&s=19).

- The German for turtle is _Schildkröte_: shield-toad <span style="font-family: 'Noto Color Emoji', 'Apple Color Emoji', 'Segoe UI Emoji', 'Segoe UI Symbol', 'Android Emoji', 'EmojiSymbols';">🐢</span>.

- German treats snails and slugs as variations of the same concept: _Schnecken_.
  Slugs specifically are called _Nacktschnecken_: naked snails.

- OK this one is pretty, like ... cerebral. I think to try and get across why
  it's funny, it's best for me to just flail around trying to explain it.

  English has a thing called "phrasal verbs" where a certain verb, in
  combination with certain adjectives or prepositions, take on a specific
  meaning separate from or beyond the straightforward combination of those
  words.

  For example consider "take someone on", "throw something out", "get down with
  someone", "pissed off". If you were learning English, you'd have to learn
  explicitly what each of those phrases means even if you already knew their
  constituent words.

  German has a related thing called called "separable verbs". These often look
  exactly like their English phrasal-verb counterparts, for example: "lass mich
  rein" translates very straightforwardly to "let me in".

  The major difference between German's separable verbs and English's phrasal
  verbs is that the former are treated as a single word: "lass mich rein" is
  really just two words, _reinlassen_ and _mich_ - the former just gets split in
  two in certain syntactic contexts.

  This makes for a weird feeling where deeply idiomatic English has jarringly
  straightforward translations into German, followed by an uncanny-valley
  feeling from the difference in the grammatical structures and semantics of the
  verbs.

  A couple of examples that tickle me are :

   - _abgefucked_; this means "fucked up", but that _ge_ in the middle is weird.
     _Ge-_ is normally a prefix that makes things past-tense. The -ed suffix
     fills that role in English, which is actually cognate with another
     inflectional suffix in German verbs, for example the -t in _gesucht_ which
     is cognate with, and means the same as, "searched". So we have two
     separate past-tense inflections, one from English and one from German, but
     they both feel necessary because of the shared linguistic ancestry. Also,
     why is _ab_ the chosen preposition? It's because it sounds like "up"! This
     whole thing is an incredibly dense knot of cross-language interactions
     that bears quite detailed linguistic analysis, yet at the same time it's
     basically just people saying "fucked up" in a kind of German accent.

     Do you know what I mean...? Do you know what I mean???
    
   - _anscheissen_; "es scheisst mich an" means something like "I can't be arsed
     with it" but has the literal structure "it shits me on". Not "it shits on
     me" but "it shits me on".

- "Es ist mir Wurst" is a way to say "whatever"/"it makes no difference to me".
  Literally: "it's sausage to me".

- A puncticilious person is called a _Korinthenkacker_ in [High
  German](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_German): a raisin-pooper. In
  [Swiss German](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swiss_German) it's
  _Tüpflishiiser_: someone who shits little dots.

- The German word for syrup is _Dicksaft_: thick-juice. lol, lmao

- German adjectives are inflected depending on the gender and number of the noun
  they're describing. In certain contexts this happens even when you don't
  actually say the noun. 
  
  For example if someone asks what cup you'd like, you might answer "eine blaue"
  \- a blue one. To do that correctly you have to call to mind that the word
  "Tasse" (cup) is feminine. But you could also have said "ein blaues", in this
  case the person who asked would have to deduce that you were probably thinking
  of the neuter word "Glas" (glass).

  I don't think it's at all unique to German but I had never really thought
  about it before; it's pretty funny that absent words influence grammar like
  that, in my opinion.

- Gums are called _Zahnfleisch_: tooth-meat. Or tooth-flesh, take your pick.

- To (mostly ironically) threaten someone with violence in Swiss German you can
  say "Ich zeige dir wo dä Bartli dä Moscht holt": "I'll show you where little
  Bart gets the apple juice!"

- The 2008 film _In Bruges_'s German translation is called _Brügges Shen... Und
  Sterben?_ - "See Bruges... and Die?"

- The word for a queue is _Warteschlange_: wait-snake.

- Pubic hair is called _Schaamhaare_: shame-hair.

  (Hair is another of those nouns that's uncountable in German, so actually it's
  shame-hairs).
  
And here's some **bonus content** about Vietnamese.

- Vietnamese is a totally [analytic
  language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Analytic_language); words aren't
  inflected with varied endings or vowel-changes or anything like that. Instead
  you just convey complex meaning by combining many words.

  Most of the foreign languages English-speakers learn are more
  [synthetic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synthetic_language) than English;
  the usual experience is to be dismayed at the size of a conjugation table when
  learning a Romance language for example. So it's fun to experience a language
  that goes all the way in the opposite direction.

- The Vietnamese for a shower is _vòi sen_: lotus-sprinkle; because a shower
  head looks a lot like a [lotus seed
  pod](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c8/Lotus_seed_pod.jpg/450px-Lotus_seed_pod.jpg?20200526035413).

- According to my brief and shallow experience of Vietnamese culture, the
  question "how old are you" often comes right along with "what's your name" in
  the social protocol. This is because you need to know someone's age relative
  to you in order to know which pronouns you'll use. Both for yourself, and for
  referring to the other person.

  Westerners might assume that this distinction is obviated in many modern
  contexts, like _du_/_Sie_ in German or _tu_/_vous_ in French. At least
  according to the Vietnamese teachers I asked, this is not the case at all! I
  was advised that defaulting to a "neutral" choice like *bạn*  would come
  across as uncomfortably intimate, and that you should always strive to use 
  a precise pronoun.

  (Be cautious about repeating this too confidently though, I didn't
  successfully learn Vietnamese, it's pretty likely I'm misunderstanding
  something.)