---
layout: post
title:  "WENUS Priests"
date:   2024-02-07 19:56:03 +0100
---

I work for a big tech company. I have a laptop that I carry to work in my bike
bag and plug into the screens and keyboard and mouse. I mainly use it to log
into a virtual machine in "Western Europe". I like "my" virtual machine because
it has lots of virtual CPUs and virtual RAM, although when it reboots it's
pretty slow for a while. I think this is because its virtual disk dissipates
into the ether of a staggeringly complex globally distributed data storage
system and has to be reconstituted on-demand.

I can run smaller, ephemeral virtual machines on my big virtual machine but most
days I need to test my code on a "real machine". I can reserve these and log
into them from my big virtual machine. Typing on them is slow, they feel very
distant. I suppose they are in America near the company's HQ, or perhaps in
Taiwan near to where I assume they are manufactured. Or perhaps they are spread
all over the world. Maybe some of them are in Western Europe. I could find out
but I don't seem to care.

I work on security features for platform software. It's very hard to explain
what the features do, even to software engineers with security expertise. It's
very hard for us to be sure that the features are working. They don't do
anything at all that's easy to detect, only smooth out the statistical
likelihood of certain invisible events inside CPUs, and the performance of
customer workloads.

We take lots of care to minimise the performance impact for customers. I don't
know who the customers are. We benchmark generic workloads that we suppose
customers must run, like databases. We feed made up data into databases and read
it back again. It's very important that we can do this efficiently.

The security features are very important, because otherwise advanced attackers
would be able to exploit the statistical patterns in events inside the CPU to
steal data from our customers. Realistically, they would probably have to have
inside agents working for the company to pull this off. It would be enormously
difficult and risky, they would have to have grave motivations far beyond mere
criminal greed. I don't know if they exist.

In short, the work is mysterious and important.

I enjoy my job but I wonder if it the abstraction of it all does psychic damage.
Artists who depict this damage ([XKCD](https://xkcd.com/722/),
[Severance](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gnffe374Upw),
[Friends](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k-0HdQPPmW8)) may or may not have
actually experienced it. I don't _feel_ it, even though sometimes I think,
implausibly, I can feel the damage that a Coca-Cola does to my teeth. Maybe
that's just because it's damaging the feeling parts.

My colleague and I were once visiting another office site where they have some
retired server racks on display. We both stood there for a while, drawn to their
physical presence but unable to extract any meaning from it. Two computer
experts going "look, that must be the RAM". Like priests seeing God and it's
just a guy with two ears.