---
date: '2025-07-29T12:40:54+02:00'
title: 'Learning an alphabet is easy'
draft: true
---

I studied Russian at school. People often say "wow, Russian, that must be so
hard, with the different alphabet and all". I think this reveals that they are
thinking wrongly about learning a language. I think this wrongness is
instructive.

Learning a language is a really, really big deal. You can memorise the Cyrillic
alphabet in an hour's work. You could probably master it in 10. It's much harder
than using chopsticks but it's much, _much_ easier than speaking Russian[^1]. 

If you're jumping on the alphabet as a reason to be intimidated by Russian then
you might not have internalised the much more intimidating fact that Russian is
a foreign language.

I also sometimes hear people say "I really want to learn German, and I think I'd
benefit from classes, but even the cheapest ones cost thousands per year". I
think this is a symptom of the same underestimation. If you want to learn German
enough that you're willing to do that it takes to learn German, but you hesitate
to spend a few grand on it, something is miscalibrated (unless you're
particularly cash-poor or time-rich).

Concrete mixers are expensive. If you're paving a short garden path, you can
save a bit of money by mixing the concrete with a shovel in a wheelbarrow. But
if you were building a concrete house you wouldn't consider this. Language
lessons are like concrete mixers[^2].

If you're building a house and someone says "wow, a house? But you'll have to
clear that topsoil before you can dig the foundations!" you'll give them a funny
look. Alphabets are like topsoil.

[^1]: The US Foreign Service Institute
[estimates](https://www.state.gov/foreign-service-institute/foreign-language-training)
1,012 hours of _class time_ is needed to reach "professional working
proficiency.

[^2] I'm glossing over the fact that different people learn best in different
ways. For some people, language lessons might not help very much. But those
people are in a minority. And if you really want to learn a language, it's
probably worth spending a few grand _just to find out if you're one of those
people_.